- If you don’t already have a 1.5 or greater Java 2 Standard Edition SDK (Software Development Kit), you need it. If you’re on Linux, Windows, or Solaris, you can get it for free from java.sun.com (Sun’s website for Java developers). It usually takes no more than two clicks from the main page to get to the J2SE downloads page. Get the latest non-beta version posted. The SDK includes everything you need to compile and run Java. If you’re running Mac OS X 10.4, the Java SDK is already installed. It’s part of OS X, and you don’t have to do anything else. If you’re on an earlier version of OS X, you have an earlier version of Java that will work for 95% of the code in this book.
Note: This book is based on Java 1.5, but for stunningly unclear marketing reasons, shortly before release, Sun renamed it Java 5, while still keeping “1.5” as the version number for the developer’s kit. So, if you see Java 1.5 or Java 5 or Java 5.0, or "Tiger" (version 5’s original code-name), they all mean the same thing. There was never a Java 3.0 or 4.0—it jumped from version 1.4 to 5.0, but you will still find places where it’s called 1.5 instead of 5. Don't ask.
(Oh, and just to make it more entertaining, Java 5 and the Mac OS X 10.4 were both given the same code-name of “Tiger”, and since OS X 10.4 is the version of the Mac OS you need to run Java 5, you’ll hear people talk about “Tiger on Tiger”.  It just means Java 5 on OS X 10.4).
- The SDK does not include the API documentation, and you need that! Go back to java.sun.com and get the J2SE API documentation. You can also access the API docs online, without downloading them, but that’s a pain. Trust us, it’s worth the download.
- You need a text editor. Virtually any text editor will do (vi, emacs, pico), including the GUI ones that come with most operating systems. Notepad, Wordpad, TextEdit, etc. all work, as long as you make sure they don’t append a “.txt” on to the end of your source code.
- Once you’ve downloaded and unpacked/zipped/whatever (depends on which version and for which OS), you need to add an entry to your PATH environment variable that points to the /bin directory inside the main Java directory. For example, if the J2SDK puts a directory on your drive called “j2sdk1.5.0”, look inside that directory and you’ll find the “bin” directory where the Java binaries (the tools) live. The bin directory is the one you need a PATH to, so that when you type:
% javac
at the command-line, your terminal will know how to find the javac compiler.
Note: if you have trouble with your installation, we recommend you go to javaranch.com, and join the Java-Beginning forum! Actually, you should do that whether you have trouble or not.